# 4. Places We Go When it’s Beyond Us
## Awe, Wonder, Confusion, Curiosity, Interest, Surprise

### Awe and Wonder
**Wonder** inspires the wish to understand; awe inspires the wish to let shine, to acknowledge and to unite.

When feeling **awe**, we tend to simply stand back and observe, “to provide a stage for the phenomenon to shine.” 

### Confusion
The concept of *optimal confusion* is key to understanding why **confusion** is good for us and why it’s categorized as an *epistemic emotion*—an emotion critical to knowledge acquisition and learning. 

Too much confusion can lead to frustration, giving up, disengagement, or even boredom. 

### Surprise
**Surprise** is an interruption caused by information that doesn’t fit with our current understanding or expectations. It causes us to reevaluate. 

We can think of surprise as “a bridge between cognition and emotion.” But it’s a short bridge! Surprise is the shortest-duration emotion, rarely lasting more than a few seconds. 

Surprise is also an amplifier for subsequent emotion, with more surprising events resulting in stronger emotional reactions. 

### Curiosity and Interest
**Curiosity** is recognizing a gap in our knowledge about something that interests us, and becoming emotionally and cognitively invested in closing that gap through exploration and learning. 

**Interest** is a cognitive openness to engaging with a topic or experience. 

With interest, our mind is open to seeing what’s there, but with curiosity, we’ve acknowledged a gap in what we know or understand, and our heart and head are both invested in closing that gap. 

#3 Resources/Atlas_of_emotions/4 When It's Beyond Us#